---
title: "Day 11: Space Police"
---

Whenever the intcode machine comes back I really want to start these posts by saying something like "and here we go again", but that's really uninspired and gets annoying after a while.
I don't really have any other way of starting off today's post though, so... **Here we go again!**

This time we're dealing with code that has an external state. To read from or write to this external state using the input and output instructions is a pretty nifty idea.
The puzzle is basically a combination of day 8's image rendering part and the intcode machine and I appreciate when puzzles build on each other like that and that's all I have to say on the matter.

I made a really silly mistake while working on the first part.
To get the last two outputs from my intcode interpreter I took the first two items you get by reversing over the output. This method *does* get the last two items, but they're in reverse order...
I ended up treating the colour as the rotation and vice versa and because their values are both either 0 or 1 they are practically indistinguishable.
I only realised this after I had (accidentally) solved the problem by using a different approach for getting the output. I made it so the interpreter's output buffer is always cleared after retrieving it. This way, the colour and rotation will always be at index 0 and 1 respectively.

Other than that nothing spectacular happened for the first part.

My vector rotation function uses a simplified version of the two dimensional rotation matrix which means it rotates counterclockwise.
But I treated it as though it rotated clockwise at first.
This wouldn't have posed a problem for the first part, but the bug would've manifested had I used it for the second part, because the x axis would've been mirrored.

Speaking of mirrored, I used a coordinate system where the y axis is up but the puzzle seems to be treating y as down. The result was that my output was upside down, but that wasn't a hard fix.
It boils down to just printing the lines in reverse.

It's a pity we don't get to see each rendered character, otherwise I could implement the [OCR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_character_recognition) I talked about in the post from day 8. I could look up other people's solutions to cobble together an alphabet, but that's a lot of work and I really like the way the coloured output looks.
I will remember it for the next time though ;)
